---
###
# unit information: 
# Unit 5: Pitch, Intervals and Key Areas
###
title: Pitch, Intervals and Key Areas
number: 5
short_description: short description of the unit
summary: Pitch is one of the most important attributes of music. This unit will cover the different types of pitch we may perceive in music. We start with the relationship between frequency in the physical world and pitch in the perceptual world. We continue to discuss the cases when pitch may occur in the absence of energy at the perceived frequency, and propose models which may account for this perceptual phenomenon. Different types of pitch perception will be discussed, including the qualities that makes it form transposable melodies and harmonies. Finally, we will discuss pitch spaces that enable the systematic use of pitch as a musical medium.
authors:
 - Georg Hajdu
 - Psyche Loui 
topics: [Pitch, Interval, Theory of Pitch Perception, Tonality, Key Area]
test_questions:
 - Calculate the sizes of following intervals.  Pythagorean major third (81/64),  septimal minor seventh (7/4) and undecimal augmented fourth (11/8). Determine how much they deviate from their equal-tempered counterparts.

 - The calculation of virtual pitch was attributed to cubic difference tones  in past which, strikingly, yield similar results. Explain why the brain will most likely still use a different method and give an example where difference tones and virtual pitch differ.
 
 - Discuss to what extent the tonality profiles derived by the probe tone method point to universal musical principles or whether it's rather cultural influences that determine the perception of tonal hierachies.

###
# page layout:
# don't change
###

layout: unit
citations: ""
mathjax: true
---

{% include unit_preamble.md %}

# Introduction

The concept of sound frequencies was first introduced in [Unit 01](/MUTOR/units/01.html). While frequency is a physical attribute which characterizes waves of sound energy, pitch is a perceptual attribute which describes our experience of tones, whether pure (one partial) or complex (several partials). Generally, the higher the frequency of a sound, the higher the perceived pitch. As the spectral composition and temporal development of a sound determine pitch and timbre, an unambiguous pitch percept is only formed for harmonic sounds whose partials have frequencies that are multiples of the fundamental frequency (which also corresponds to the perceived pitch). Inharmonic sounds, in turn, whose partials don't follow this simple rule, have ambiguous pitch caused by competing virtual pitches.

# Pitch

Pitch is thought of as a morphophoric, or form-bearing, medium. This means that patterns of pitch can take on a certain form (i.e. melody) which can be transposed - shifted up or down in pitch - and remain invariant in its perceptual structure. Musically, this accounts for how the same melody can be transposed into different keys and still be recognizable as the same theme.

## Frequency and Pitch

Pitch is perceived in sounds that are periodic; i.e. sounds with features which recur at regular frequencies. Aperiodic sounds are more likely to be perceived not as pitches, but as noise or transient (quickly-changing) clicks. Thus, pitch perception depends on frequencies of sounds entering the ears. 

The orchestra tunes to the pitch of concert A4, which usually corresponds to sounds with the fundamental frequency of 440Hz. This means that while energy of sound waves may be at 440Hz or above, we perceive sounds to be equivalent in pitch as a pure tone at 440Hz. 

Our percept of pitch is **logarithmically organized** such that an octave above concert A is twice its frequency, therefore, 880Hz; whereas the next octave above 880Hz is twice 880Hz, which is 1760Hz. Thus each octave corresponds to a doubling in frequency, resulting in a logarithmic function relating frequency to pitch.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/PitchVsFrequency.jpg" description="Pitch vs. Frequency" %}

## Fundamental Frequency

The percept of pitch generally correlates with the fundamental frequency of sound waves. The fundamental frequency is defined as the highest common factor of all sound waves from the same source, which gives rise to the pitch percept. 

As an illustration of fundamental frequency and its relationship with pitch, consider four tones, each with different numbers of components, but where all the components are integer multiples of 440Hz. The perceived pitch of these four tones should be the same, although the frequencies which comprise them are different. The higher components in frequencies of n times 440Hz do not change the perceived pitch, but they do influence the percept of timbre. 

The following are four tones with differing numbers of partials, but with the same fundamental frequency and thus the same perceived pitch.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit5_440pure.png" description="Pure tone at 440Hz" %}
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Pure tone at 440Hz</title>
  </head>
  <body>
   <div align="center">
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_440pure.wav">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
   </div>
  </body>
</html>
{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit5_440x2complex.png" description="Two-tone complex with fundamental frequency of 440Hz" %}
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Two-tone complex with fundamental frequency of 440Hz</title>
  </head>
  <body>
   <div align="center">
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_440x2complex.wav">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
   </div>
  </body>
</html>
{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit5_440x3complex.png" description="Three-tone complex with F0 of 440Hz" %}
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Three-tone complex with F0 of 440Hz</title>
  </head>
  <body>
   <div align="center">
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_440x3complex.wav">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
   </div>
  </body>
</html>  
{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit5_440x4complex.png" description="Four-tone complex with F0 of 440Hz" %}
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Four-tone complex with F0 of 440Hz</title>
  </head>
  <body>
   <div align="center">
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_440x4complex.wav">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
   </div>
  </body>
</html>  
{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit5_440x3virtual.png" description="Three-tone complex with missing fundamental of 440Hz" %}
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Three-tone complex with missing fundamental of 440Hz</title>
  </head>
  <body>
   <div align="center">
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_440x3virtual.wav">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
   </div>
  </body>
</html>
  
The fundamental frequency of a sound is also known as its periodicity pitch, and is shorthanded as F0.

## Virtual Pitch

Sometimes, pitch is perceived at a fundamental frequency even when energy is nonexistent at the frequency of the fundamental. This is known as virtual pitch. Virtual pitch, also known as the missing fundamental, is a classic phenomenon in audition where sound is perceived at a frequency where no energy is present. When energy from harmonic components other than the fundamental is present at integer multiples of the fundamental frequency, the brain is able to infer a virtual pitch at the missing fundamental. Mechanisms that the brain may be using to infer virtual pitch is still an issue of debate, although various models of pitch perception (see below) have been proposed to explain this perceptual phenomenon which is akin to subjective contour in vision.
Virtual pitch is only perceived if the missing fundamental frequency lies within the existence region for pitch, which is approximately the frequency range of 30Hz to 3.2 kHz (Pressnitzer et al, 2001).

   <div align="center">
    <video controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_40_Masking_Spectral_And_Virtual_Pitch.mp4">
      Your browser does not support the video element.
    </video>
    <video controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_41_Masking_Spectral_And_Virtual_Pitch.mp4">
      Your browser does not support the video element.
    </video>
    <video controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit5_42_Masking_Spectral_And_Virtual_Pitch.mp4">
      Your browser does not support the video element.
    </video>
   </div>
   
Virtual pitch demonstrations (from ASA demonstration CD): 
Spectral and virtual pitch: you will hear the tune of Westminster chimes presented in virtual pitch, due to the configuration of spectral components harmonically related to the missing fundamental. The spectral and virtual pitches will each be masked in the second and third clips. The video features _autocorrelograms_ of the auditory signal (see below for an explanation).

## Strike notes and other curiosities

Terhardt claims that at least three adjacent partials are necessary for the brain to most effectively infer the fundamental pitch in harmonic sounds in the absence of lower partials, such as 6/7/8 oder 10/11/12. However, he found that for 11/12/13, the inferred virtual pitch differs slightly from the frequency of the period (F0). This is hinting at a mechanism for pitch detection that takes more than just the periodicity of a signal into consideration. Starting from this observation and the phenomenon of _strike notes_ in bells - pitches clearly perceived but absent from the bell sprectrum -, Terhardt has formulated a theory of _pattern recognition_ of pitch or _template theory_ (see below). Terhardt asserts that, typically, the first six partials are processed to create a stable pitch perceipt.

# Pitch Perception Models

For centuries, hearing and musical scientists have attempted to build an optimal model that would account for pitch perception. An accurate model of pitch perception must describe how components of frequencies are converted into pitch in the logarithmic scale; it must also explain how fundamental frequencies are calculated, as well as the phenomenon of virtual pitch. Early pitch perception models fall under two categories: spectral models and temporal models.

## Spectral Models

Spectral models of pitch perception, which are based on the frequency spectrum of sounds, tend to start with the Fourier analysis, which convert sound waves into its frequency components. One of the early spectral or place models was proposed by Helmholtz who speculated that each sinusoidal component of a sound triggers sensation at a place coding for pitch. Thus, the ear is a frequency analyzer: Sounds create "resonances" on the basilar membrane triggering nerve impulses. 

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit5_AuditoryFilterbank.png" description="Representations of a harmonic complex tone with a fundamental frequency (F0) of 440 Hz. The upper panel shows the power spectrum. The second panel shows the auditory filterbank, representing the filtering that occurs in the cochlea. The third panel shows the the time-averaged output of the filterbank, or excitation pattern. The fourth panel shows some sample time waveforms at the output of the filterbank, including filters centered at the F0 and the fourth harmonic, illustrating resolved harmonics, and filters centered at the 8th and 12th harmonic of the complex, illustrating harmonics that are less well resolved and show amplitude modulations at a rate corresponding to the F0." %}
(Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4215732/)

## Temporal Models and Phase Locking
In contrast, temporal models make use of the periodicity of waveforms comprising sounds. According to Schouten, the fundamental frequency can be determined by  calculating the time between periodic points in the waveform. Recent research suggests that the brain is capable of locking into the phase of a sinusoid well above 4000Hz.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/temporal-simple.png" description="Periodic waveform of a simple tone"%}
{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/temporal-complex.png" description="Periodic waveform of a complex tone" %}

## Template Theory

Modern theories of pitch perception take into account both spectral and temporal components of sound. Two types of modern pitch perception theories which receive the most support today are the pattern matching models and the autocorrelation models. Pattern-matching models of pitch perception, such as the harmonic template matching model (e.g. Lin & Hartmann, 1998), postulate that we have stored in our brains a set of templates which, when frequency components are activated, we overlay onto the pattern of activation in order to calculate the fundamental pitch.

## Autocorrelation Models

The autocorrelation models (Licklider, 1959, further developed by Lyon / Slaney and Patterson) use a measure of self-similarity of a waveform in order to derive its fundamental. It is based on the idea that a periodic waveform, when phase-shifted to exactly one period of its fundamental away from a starting point, should correlate perfectly with itself. By comparing the time lag between perfectly correlated frequency components, the model can derive the period of the complex sound, and thus the fundamental frequency. As a result, some phenomena can now be explained, which arise by instance by detuning lower partials or transposing sounds with just odd partials.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/The-autocorrelogram-A-for-a-200-Hz-fundamental-harmonic-complex-computed-by-taking-the_W640.jpg" description="Autocorrelogram" %}

{% include note author="vg" text="the same as in Unit 02 I have commented all the quotes and references so we can decide a format to do it" %}
{% comment %} Yost, W.A. Pitch perception. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 71, 1701–1715 (2009).  {% endcomment %}

{% comment %}Figure  6 {% endcomment %}
The autocorrelogram (A) for a 200-Hz-fundamental harmonic complex computed by taking the autocorrelation in each channel {% comment %} of the neural activation pattern shown in Figure 5.42. {% endcomment %} The high correlation every 5 msec is used to predict a 200-Hz pitch (reciprocal of 5 msec) for this stimulus. Panel B depicts the summary autocorrelogram for the 200-Hz-fundamental harmonic complex obtained by summing the correlations across channels for the autocorrelogram shown in panel A.  

The debate between pattern matching and autocorrelation models have received widely discussed among hearing researchers in recent years. While new data continues to emerge in support of either model, results from neuroscience looking for autocorrelators or harmonic templates in the auditory system may contribute to resolve these debates.


{% include note author="gh" text="I'd like go over the cases when the brain fails to calculate correct pitch: Low-pitched triangle wave" %}

# Cognitive Models of Pitch

American psychologist Roger Shepard has developed a cognitive psychological model that represents pitch in a helix. In this case, the circular chroma circle (horizontal) can be distinguished from height (vertical). Octaves are always on the same side of the helix. By a clever construction tones can be formed, in which the dimension of the height is eliminated. These sounds, called "Shepard tones", are useful for constructing auditory illusions, e.g. endlessly rising or falling glissandi or scales. 

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/helix.png" description="Pitch helix" %}

Taking the relationships into consideration, Shepard eventually adjusted the helix to a five-dimensional model.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/Helix-Fifths-Relationsship.jpg" description="Pitch helix" %}

The so—called Tritonus paradox can be demonstrated with Shepard tones. A tritone is heard depending on its context either as falling or rising.

Evidence that pitch chroma and pitch height activate different parts of the brain come from Warren et al (2003) {% include note author="vg" text="‘Warren et al‘ should be a quote to our references right?" %} who showed that changes in both chroma and height activate the auditory cortex, but changes in pitch chroma activate regions anterior to the regions activated by pitch height changes. 

# Intervals

The mathematical relationship between an interval created by two pitches and their respective frequencies is given by this formula:

\begin{equation}
I=1200\cdot log_2(\frac{F_1}{F_0}) = 1200\cdot \frac{log_{10}(\frac{F_1}{F_0})}{log_{10}(2)}
\label{eq:FrequencyToPitch}
\end{equation}

Replace F1 and F0 by integer numbers and get the result by entering the formula into a calculator or browser.  

The unit for I is cents — one cent being a 1/100th of a semitone.

{% include begin-table description="Intervals of the chromatic scale" %}
| Interval (Name) | Frequency ratio | Interval (Size in Cents) | Size of Tempered Interval
| unison | 1/1 | 0 | 0 |
| minor second | 	16/15 | 112 | 100 |
| major second | 9/8  | 204 | 200 |
| minor third | 6/5 | 316 | 300 |
| major third | 5/4 | 386 | 400 |
| just fourth | 4/3 | 498 | 500 |
| diminished fifth | 7/5 | 583 | 600 |
| juist fifth | 3/2 | 702 | 700 |
| minor sixth | 8/5 | 814 | 800 |
| major sixth | 5/3 | 884 | 900 |
| minor seventh | 16/9 | 996 | 1000 |
| major seventh | 15/8 | 1088 | 1100 |
| octave | 2/1 | 1200 | 1200 |
{% include end-table %}

# The Fifth as the Generator of Tonality

The fifth (3/2) occupies an outstanding position in almost all musical cultures. In contrast to so-called imperfect consonances such as thirds and sixths, deviations of the fifth are not well tolerated by listeners. It has a similarity to the octave whose tones are perceived as _equivalent_.

The special significance of the fifth manifests itself in the fact that it appears on four different levels of music and is thus indicative of the holistic, self-similar or fractal nature of tonal music.

1. Harmonic Series
1. Intervals of Complex tones
1. Function: tonic - dominant
1. Key Areas: C major - G major

# Tonality and Probe Tone Method

Roger Shepard and his student Carol Krumhansl developed the Probe Tone method, aimed to explain the notion of tonality. Tonality is a hierarchical phenomenon in which the tones arranged in a system have varying amount of tension with each other. This raises the not yet fully answered question, whether the types of sound used in music (for example, with harmonic partials) ultimately determine how the music manifests itself.

In this method, subjects listen to cadences and scales, with the target sound (the tonic) being replaced by a so-called probe tone. The subjects are asked on a scale of 1 to 7 to judge how well the probe tone "fits".

By analyzing the data, three groups emerged which, depending on their musical background, were more or less able to perceive tonal hierarchies in major or minor context (the figure on the right shows results typical of experienced musicians).

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/ProbeTone-Method.png" description="Probe Tone Method" %}

# Key Space

Another view of pitch and tonal material looks at harmony and key changes in addition to single pitches. Krumhansl, Kessler & Bharucha (1983) found that dissimilarity judgments of pairs of chords map best onto a torus. The toroidal representation allows different tonal relations to map along the different planes of the torus, such that the C major key, for instance, is closely related to G major (circle of fifths), a minor (relative minor), and c minor (parallel minor).

The arrangement of the 24 keys on the surface of a torus can now be derived from the experimentally obtained data by [Multidimensional Scaling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multidimensional_scaling). Multidimensional scaling is a process capable of constructing a two-dimensional map from a list of distances (such as the route New York - Tokyo or Melbourne - Berlin). Taking now the tonality profiles as the starting point for all 24 major and minor keys, the comparison of the profiles yields a map depicting the distances (i.e., degree of relationship) of the keys as points on the surface of a torus (“donut"). It is noticeable that the two fifths (major = red, minor = blue) spiral around the torus.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/torus_keys.png" description="Representation of Key Areas on the Surface of a Torus" %}

Interestingly, Arnold Schönberg in his book "Structural Functions of Harmony" came up with a chart of key regions which is strikingly similar to the torus unfolded into two dimensions.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/chart-of-key-regions.png" description="Schoenberg's Chart of Key Regions" %}

# Applications of Key Space

## Music Generation

At the University of California, Berkeley, David Wessel has instigated a program that uses the opposite approach: users move their mouse over the surface of the torus, controlling a generative process that generates profiles according to the melodies; the height of each bar for a given tone determines the frequency of its appearance. This makes it possible to continuously modulate from key to key. In the lower illustration, the torus has been cut in two dimensions and "laid flat".

{% include note author="gh" text="Images of Key Space Max patch need to be inserted here" %}

## Music Analysis

With the help of Krumhansl's model, when playing (tonal) music, it is possible to determine which key is currently predominant and how the music moves across the surface of the cut-open torus. The zones become brighter, the clearer the sense of tonality is. In the animation (modulation in a composition by J.S. Bach), the authors compared the answer of an expert (upper half) with the output of a computer program (lower half).

{% include begin-figure description="Modulation on the surface of the torus" %}
<video width="435" height="343" controls>
  <source src="/MUTOR/assets/videos/girl_from_ipanema_lbl.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
{% include end-figure %}

{% include note author="vg" text="I don't know why I can not reproduce this video on my browser" %}

# Summary

{% include unit_postamble.md %}
