---
###
# unit information: 
# Unit 9: Scale and Harmony
###
title: Scale and Harmony
number: 9
short_description: A scale is a set of ascending or descending pitches ordered according to cognitive, theoretical and/or historical principles. They provide the pitch material from which harmonies are built. The theory of harmony is preoccupied with the laws governing the structure, relation, and progression of chords, much of it based on the principle of tension and release. In recent times, composers and theorists have also started to consider elements such as roughness and inharmonicity when constructing sonorities and their progressions.
summary: In this unit we have learned about scales and harmony. Harmony is a complex notion that refers both to the pleasantness of simultanously sounding notes as well as the logic in which one sonority moves to another within a given framework such as a key area. A scale contains the tones from which sonorities are formed. These tones can be tuned to pitches according to various principles of which just intonation and equal temperament are examples of. The theory and practice of microtonality takes advantage of the fact that scales can be formed from a virtually unlimited number of pitches. In the 20th and 21st centuries, the principles of tension and release have been expanded by taking musical parameters such as roughness and inharmonicity in consideration. 
authors: 
 - Georg Hajdu
 - John MacCallum
topics: [Scale, Harmony, Microtonality, Inharmonicity, Roughness]
test_questions:
 - How does temperament affect harmony and harmonic progression?
 - Describe the differences and similarities between harmony and timbre.
 - What are some ways in which recent composers have sought to create tension and release in music without going back to the tonal system of the past?
 - Why is the context in which a sonority appears important?

###
# page layout:
# don't change
###
layout: unit
citations: ""
mathjax: true
---

{% include unit_preamble.md %}

# Introduction

In this unit we will look at scales and harmony from the perspective of perception and cognition of music. In units 4 and 5 we have already learned about consonance and dissonance as well as pitch, intervals and key areas. Harmony is beased on those principles, e.g. we expect chords to have low sensory consonance and we also are keenly aware of when chords don't seem to fit in a passage of music. 

[Webster's dictionary](http://www.m-w.com) defines harmony in reference to music as (1) _the combination of simultaneous musical notes in a chord, (2) the structure of music with respect to the composition and progression of chords or (3) the science of the structure, relation, and progression of chords._ In more general terms, harmony also denotes _the pleasing or congruent arrangement of parts_.

As we can see from the above definition, the word harmony often refers to either a chord, a progression of chords, or a consonant (or generally speaking, pleasing) sonority.  The task of defining harmony is a difficult one — is it a chord or a progression of chords?  How are harmony and harmonic progression different from timbre and timbral evolution?  In this unit, we will discuss these questions and look at how composers in the 20th and 21st centuries view harmony. We will also look at the effects that tuning systems have on harmony.

Scales (derived from Italian _scala_ meaning "staircase") are the collection of pitches, harmonies and melodies are formed from. They usually span the interval of an octave and repeat when going beyond it. The pitch of the individual tones within a scale depends on a variety of factors which have undergone changes throughout history as composers focussed on aspects such as pure sonorities or being able to modulate to distant key areas. It turns out that using 12 pitches per octave is the result of a compromise, but there has been an interest throughout history to consider scales with fewer or many more pitches per octave or other intervals. The deviation from the standard is usually referred to as microtonality. 

# Historical View of Scale and Harmony

The term harmony comes from a Greek word that translates literally as "means of joining" and is related to the word for joint or shoulder [http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=harmony].  In ancient Greek music, the term referred to the juxtaposition of different elements, but since the musical practice of the time did not include the simultaneous sounding of multiple notes, this concept was only used as a way of discussing the theoretical relationships between pitches.  In the Medieval period, composers began to write music in which two notes that formed a perfect consonance (fourths, fifths, or octaves) were sung simultaneously, and in the Renaissance Gioseffo Zarlino wrote of triadic harmony that included the imperfect consonances:  thirds.  These descriptions pertain only to the structure of an isolated simultaneity, although it is clear that as far back as the 15th century, theorists understood the concept of harmony to encompass not only the relationships between simultaneously sounded pitches, but the relationships between chords.  Additionally, some theorists have considered harmony to be the progression through, and alternation of, consonant and dissonant sonorities.  

The distinction between harmony and harmonic progression is an important one.  Consider, for example, the C major chord in figure 1.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_cmaj.png" description="C major triad" %}

In the key of C major, this chord has a feeling of stability since it is the tonic of the key.  However, in the key of F major, the same chord will sound less stable as if it should move to F. As we can see, the context in which a chord appears is important. Another example is the famous "Tristan chord"—the opening harmony of Richard Wagner's opera Tristan und Isolde (figure 9.3).  The nature of this sonority has been debated for decades, but the debate centers less around the chord itself, and more around the function and way in which it resolves.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_tristan.png" description="Tristan Prelude" %}

<html>
  <head>
    <title>The Auditory System</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit9_The-Tristan-Chord.mp3">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
  </body>
</html>

The chord can easily be explained as a half-diminished seventh chord or as a French augmented 6th chord where the G# is an appoggiatura  to the A, however, the way in which it resolves calls these labels into question.

# Tuning and Temperament

Since the time of J.S. Bach, equal-temperament has increasingly dominated Western classical music.  In this system, every semitone is of equal size in log-frequency (remember that our perception of pitch is logarithmic).  For a given number of semitones, n, we can calculate the frequency from a reference f_r using the formula

\begin{equation}
f_n=f_r(\sqrt[12]{2})^n
\label{eq:Equal-Temperament}
\end{equation}

Although a thorough discussion of tuning is beyond the scope of this unit (Wikipedia has numerous pages and links devoted to the topic), we can say a few things about equal temperament and the systems that it replaced.

Any tuning system must be measured against just intonation in which intervals are calculated by integer ratios, e.g. a just fifth is 3/2, a just fourth is 4/3, and a just major third is 5/4.  Although the just intervals are considered by many to be the most pleasing, they can lead to complex problems.  For example, a just major third above A1 (55 Hz) is 68.75 Hz, but if we use 55 Hz (A1) as our reference frequency and calculate a C#1 by going up in fifths, we arrive at 69.609375 (55 • 1.5 = 82.5 (E2) • 1.5 = 123.75 (B2) • 1.5 = 185.625 (F#3) • 1.5 = 278.4375 (C#4) / 4 = 69.609375).  One solution to this problem is to tune certain keys as perfectly as possible and allow other more distant keys to be out of tune.  Equal temperament solves the problem by making every interval (with the exception of the octave) slightly out of tune.  For example, in the case of perfect fifths, in equal temperament,

\begin{equation}
55(\sqrt[12]{2})^7 = 82.4069
\end{equation}

and in just intonation, 

\begin{equation}
55\cdot(\frac{3}{2}) = 82.5
\end{equation}

An important technique that defines common practice music is the modulation to distant keys.  As the harmony moves away from the home key, tension increases, however, in a tuning system where the tonic key is tuned near just intonation and the degree to which a key is out of tune increases with the distance from the home key, modulation to distant keys results in a higher level of tension.  In the following listening example, you will hear the first minute of a Capriccio (FbWV 506) by Johann Jakob Froberger (1616-1667) played on an organ tuned to meantone temperament). In the second listening example, you will hear the same passage, but played in equal temperament.

<html>
  <head>
    <title>The Auditory System</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit9_froberger-capriccioInCmaj.mp3">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
  </body>
</html>

Listening example 1. The first minute of Capriccio (FbWV 506) by Johann Jakob Froberger played on an organ in meantone temperament.

<html>
  <head>
    <title>The Auditory System</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit9_froberger-capriccioInCmaj-temp.mp3">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
  </body>
</html>

Listening example 2. Froberger's Capriccio played in equal temperament.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_froberger-capriccioInCmaj.png" description="Froberger Cappriccio C maj" %}
Figure 2.  Bars 1-12 of Capriccio (FbWV 506) by Johann Jakob Froberger.

Download the following patches which will allow you to explore different tuning systems.

[NOTE--THERE WILL BE TWO PATCHES HERE]

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_ratio-to-freq-ss.png" description="" %}

{% include note author="vg" text="There needs to be something more current! " %}


# Period Tunings
Theorists have created tunings from either deriving them from the overtone series (just-intonation tuning) or stacking fifths (Pythagorean tuning). Stacking four fifths on C leads to an E which is considerably sharper (81/64; 408 cents) than the E contained in the overtone series (5/4; 386 cents). This discrepancy - mathematically represented by the ratio 81/64 * 4/5 = 81/80 = 21.5 cents - is called the Syntonic comma. Since no tuning can exist mathematically where all thirds and fifths are just, musicians have attempted to make up for this by modifying either thirds and/or fifths — an approach referred to as _temperament_. 

## Meantone Temperament

During the Renaissance and Baroques periods meantone temperament was wide-spread: lowering fifths to keep the thirds as just as possible. 
A number of variants have been in use, e.g. quarter-comma and third-comma meantone temperament. The term quarter-comma, for instance, emphasizes the fact in this temperament the just fifth (3/2 = 701.96 cents) is lowered by an interval corresponding to a fourth of Syntonic comma (21.5 cents / 4 = 5.38 cents): 696.58 cents. Other temperaments suggested by Werckmeister, Valotti and many more are all geared towards allowing modulation to distant key areas while keeping thirds and fifth as pure as possible.

Many of these tunings and temperaments lead to tuning alternatives for a given key. For instance, in just intonation an Ab (8/5; going down by a just major third) is different from a G# (25/16; stacking two just major thirds). Hence, Keyboards such as the archicembalo built in 1588 have  been constructed to represent tuning alternatives. 

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9-Archicembalo_en_Cents.jpg" description="The Archicembalo had a large number of tuning alternatives for the 12 keys of the chromatic scale." %}

# Equal Temperament

The ultimate compromise has been achieved by introducing 12-tone equal temperament - the tuning of choice in the Classical, Romantic and Modern periods. Here, the discrepancy between 12 just fifts and 7 octaves (Pythagorian comma; 23.46 cents) is _tempered out_ by dividing up the comma evenly (23.46 / 12 = 1.96 cents) and applying this value to all fifths: 701.96 cents - 1.96 cents = 700 cents. 

By tempering out fifths, the above-mentioned tuning alternatives become _enharmonically equivalent_, e.g. there is no longer a distinction between a G# and Ab. Due to equal temperament, approaches such as dodecaphony (invented by Arnold Schoenberg in 1923) and total serialism were developed, which treat all tones equally and subject them to mathematical set operations.

## Ambiguity

We have already established that the role of a chord depends on its context. Changing this role facilitates modulation such as when the tonic triad of C major is being reinterpreted as the subdominant of G major - C major serving as a _pivot_ chord between those two key areas.
Via enharmonic equivalence, equal temperament adds another dimension to modulation as there is no *audible* distinction between the dominant seventh chord (e.g. G-B-D-F; a dominant in the key of C) and the German 6th chord (e.g. G-B-D-E#, a secondary dominant in the key of B). This ambiguity has been exploited by composers in the Classical and Romantic periods to quickly modulate to distant key areas. In the example below, Der Neugierige by Franz Schubert, Schubert exploits the harmonic ambiguity to create a musical analogy to the text by Wilhelm Müller: "One word is ‘yes’, the other is ‘no’; these two words contain for me the whole world".

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_Schubert-Der-Neugierige.png" description="Franz Schubert: Der Neugierige mm.35-46. The first blue area features the second inversion of the secondary dominant seventh chord on G resolving to the subdominant C in the key of G major. The second blue area features the German 6th chord, with the F respelled as E# resolving to the cadential 6-4 chord in B major." %}

<html>
  <head>
    <title>The Auditory System</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit9_Der_Neugierige.mp3">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
  </body>
</html> 

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9-Ambiguous-Cubes-Illusion.jpg" description="Ambiguous Cubes Illusion" %}

In the dominant seventh chord the dissonant F is resolved by downward motion (inwards) while in the German 6th chord the enharmonically equivalent leading tone E# moves up (outwards). This type of pivoting is comparable to the ambiguous cube illusion (featuring a type of a Necker cube) where a cube can either be perceived as projecting inwards or outwards. 

Looking at figure 9.7 for an extended period of time or intermittently, the perspective of the cubes flips as the brain recognizes and realizes their ambiguity, but it can only represent one state at a time. In music, the harmonic frame of reference is given by the key area, forcing one state over the other. But by skillfully moving into the ambiguous sonority, the music prepares the listener for the flip and leads him/her to realize the other state in a context where the precise timing of the events also matters.

# Microtonality
The term microtonality refers to the systematic exploration of relationships that cannot be derived from  12-tone equal temperament (12TET). In microtonal tunings, steps sizes or deviations from 12TET smaller than a semitone are common. Hence the term microtonality.

Amongst the practitioners of microtonality, we can distinguish at least two main schools of thought:

## Just Intonation
Representatives of this movement, which American composer Harry Partch ("Genesis of a Music") had a large impact on, focus on intervals that can be derived from the overtone series and its inversion, the undertone series. Parth refers to this as O-Tonality and U-Tonality. In his music and theoretical writings, hitherto uncommon intervals such as 11/7 or 7/3 came to the foreground.

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_Partch-Diamond.png" description="Arrangement of the bars in Harry Partch's Diamond Marimba in 11-limit just intonation" %}

In Just Intonation (JI), we consider the relationships between prime numbers and their powers which can be geometrically arranged as lattices. The term n-limit Just Intonation refers to the prime number n up to which harmonic relationships are considered. In the medieval period,  3-limit JI (intervals derived from fifth relationships) was the norm, while during Renaissance 5-limit JI (adding thirds) became main-stream. In the 20th century, Partch added 7 and 11 for 11-limit JI and composers such as Marc Sabat and Wolfgang von Schweinitz have gone to 23-limit and beyond. They also invented the Extended Helmholtz-Ellis Just Intonation notation capable of capturing JI relationships by means of accidentals.

In the 1980s, German musicologist Martin Vogel developed an electronic keyboard system, Mutabor, capable of retuning itself on the fly. As chords are thus always in tune, listeners will notice that the roots of the chords are shifting. Obviously, there is a trade-off between the purity of a chord and its stability in the linear, temporal dimension. Whether or not this is acceptable depends on the musical style. Jazz musician Jacob Collier, for instance, uses a similar on-the-fly tuning system developed at MIT which has created a deep interest in the contemporary Classical  and Jazz communities.

## Equal Divisions 
### Divisions of the Whole Tone
Subdivisions of the whole tone into four (quartertone tuning or 24-tone equal temperament [24TET] also known as equal devision of the octave in 24 steps [24EDO]), five (30TET) and six (36TET) were already theorized upon and practiced at the beginning of the 20th Century by composers such as Busoni, Hába, Wyschnegradsky and Ives. The 72-step "ekmelic" tuning - already used in Byzantine music theory - closely approximates 11-limit JI, while Mexican composer Julian Carrillo had a piano patented in 1940 with a keyboard in 16th notes (96TET) spanning just one octave, with a step size so small that playing a sequence of adjacent notes is perceived as a portamento.

### Other Divisions of the Octave
In theory, the octave can be devided into an infinite number of steps. So what makes one scale more interesting than another? Obviously this depends on the style of the music and whether or not the music is meant to be performed on real instruments. One important aspect is how well the scale is capable of representing just intervals, e.g. small integer frequency ratios such as 3/2 or 5/4. Theorists seeking to find temperaments with even better fifths than 12TET have considered 41TET and 53TET. The latter is derived from stacking fifths and tempering out the small _schisma_ between 53 fifths and 31 octaves. It was already known to Chinese scholars in antiquity. 

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_fifthstacker.png" description="Calculation of equidistant tunings based on stacking fifths" %}
Figure 4. Calculation of the 53-tone (and other) equidistant tunings in Max 

{% include note author="vg" text="create online version" %}

In turn, 19TET (approximation of 1/3 comma meantone tuning) and 31TET (approximation of 1/4 comma meantone tuning) feature excellent major thirds and have even been considered by 20th century scholars such as Joseph Yasser and Adriaan Fokker as contenders for the replacement of 12TET. 

In 1980 American composer Easley Blackwood wrote Twelve Microtonal Etudes for Electronic Music Media, the first systematic exploration of equidistant tunings from 13TET to 24TET.

Many tunings such as at 17TET, 19TET, 22TET, 31TET, 41TET and 53TET also feature a __diatonic__ sub set of pitches and therefore be used as alternative tunings for tonal music.  

These temperaments obey the following rule: 5 * m * s + 2 * n * s = 1200, where s is the step size of the temperament, and m and n are integers to be multiplied with s by to yield a diatonic whole tone or a semitone, resp. 

The number of steps in the temperament (t) can be calculated by applying this formula: t = 5 * m + 2 * n.

In order to avoid unpleasant fifths, the following condition should also be met: 694 cents < (3 * m + n) * s < 710 cents.

Examples:
For 12TET: m = 2 and n = 1
For 17TET: m = 3 and n = 1
For 19TET: m = 3 and n = 2
For 22TET: m = 4 and n = 1
For 31TET: m = 5 and n = 3
For 41TET: m = 7 and n = 3

### Divisions of Other Intervals 
The octave is a particular interval that creates a sense of unity with other other members of the same pitch class. Instead of the octave, other  intervals can be used a frame for a repeating scale structure. Intervals that have been considered are the just fifth (3/2) and the just twelfth (3/1), the latter bearing a close similarity to the octave. Examples are the scales (alpha, beta, gamma and delta) invented by microtonal composer Wendy Carlos and the Bohlen-Pierce scale. In Elektronische Studie II, Karlheinz Stockhausen uses a scale dividing the just 5/1 interval into 25 steps.

#### Bohlen-Pierce Scale
The Bohlen-Pierce scale, first discovered and described in 1970s by German engineer Heinz Bohlen (and independently re-discovered by John Pierce and Kees van Prooijen) divides the just twelfth into thirteen steps. The just version of the scale has a pitch set entirely made up of odd integer frequency ratios such as 5/3, 7/5, 7/3, 9/7 and 9/5. Some people also refer to this as 7-limit just intonation without 2 (3,5,7 pitch lattice).

These intervals are also included in the spectrum of the clarinet, which is one of the few wind instruments that blow over at the twelfth. What could be more appropriate than developing a clarinet with the Bohlen-Pierce tuning? http://www.sfoxclarinets.com/bpclar.html. Remarkably, the equal tempered version of the scale matches the JI version more closely than the 5-limit just and equal tempered versions of the chromatic scale match each other. 

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_BP-Scale_DifferentViews.png" description="Different representations of the Bohlen-Pierce scale" %}

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_clarinets.png" description="Bohlen-Pierce clarinets in three sizes" %}

{% include note author="vg" text="Include Example: Burning Petrol" %}


##### Bohlen-Pierce Microtonality
As the equal-tempered step size of the Bohlen-Pierce scale is 146.3 cents, it is often referred to as a _macrotonal_ scale, implying that its step size is larger than a semitone. But just like semitones of the chromatic scale, the Bohlen-Pierce scale can also be devided into smaller fractions. Two microtonal scales stand out: The Bohlen-Pierce triple scale dividing the BP step into 3 and the Bohlen-Pierce quintuple scale dividing the BP step into 5. Serendipitously, the resulting step size (1902 / 65 = 29.262 cents) is nearly identical to 41TET (1200 / 41 = 29.268 cents). We can therefore consider the Bohlen-Pierce a subset of 41TET. This fact has far-reaching implications which have barely been exploited by composers and theorists.

## Other Scales
Another classes of tunings cannot be classified into neither group. It includes the Indonesian pelog (gamelan music), which has a set of 5 small and 2 large unequal intervals, of which only 5 are used in traditional Gamelan music. According to William Sethares (see below) these instruments are tuned in such way that sonorities formed from the inharmonic sounds of the Gamelan orchestra strive for low sensory dissonance. To smooth out the unpleasantness of the inharmonic sounds is the pair-wise performance of instruments tuned to slightly different pitch which creates vibrato-like beatings.
(The other scale commonly used in gamelan music, Slendro, is characterized by a quasi-equidistant 5-tone scale.)

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_Gamelan_Dissonance_Curve.png" description="Dissonance Curve for a Gamelan instrument" %}

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_Gamelan-Orchestra.png" description="A Gamelan orchestra" %}

A comprehensive list of tunings and temperaments (currently more than 4600 files) can be found in the [Scala Archive](http://www.huygens-fokker.org/microtonality/scales.html).

# Tuning, Timbre, Spectrum, Scale
In 1998, the American music theorist and professor of electrical engineering Richard Sethares wrote a book titled Tuning, Timbre, Spectrum, Scale in which he focussed on the interdependence of consonance/dissonance and timbre. A strinking example for this is how the structure of a scale depends on the spectral content of the sonorities employed. If the sounds feature a stretched spectrum obtained by this formula (S being the stretch factor; 2 for harmonic series),

\begin{equation}
f_n(stretched) = f_0 S^{(\frac{n}{log(2)})}
\end{equation}

a candence played with those sounds also asks for the scale to be stretched by the same amount. Otherwise, the chords and their progression will sound out of tune. This is due to the lining up of the partials when playing the spectra simultaneously and sequentially. 

There are four scenarios to be considered:
1. Neither the spectra nor the scales are stretched: all sounds in tune
1. The spectra are stretched: the chords will sound dissonant
1. The scale is stretched: the chord progression sounds out of tune
1. Both spectra and scale are stretched: the chords and their progression sound smooth. 

Note that depending on the stretch factor, chords may still sound strange and wanting. This is explained by the fact that, due to the brain's ability to infer a virtual fundamental (f<sub>0</sub>), partials forming a harmonic spectrum (and - to lesser degree - tones forming a chord) will cause the sensation of a fundamental even though it may be absent from the spectrum. With stretched spectra, this virtual fundamental may not form a harmonic relationship with the members of chord, adding to its inharmonicity.

{% include note author="vg" text="We may need a JavaSxcript app here" %}

# Harmony and Timing
In Western tonal music, chord progressions follow certain _syntactic_ rules particularly in cadences and sequences. Consequently, the meaning of a chord depends on its position on a weak or strong beat. Consider the sonority G-C-E-G commonly referred to as a **second inversion 6-4 chord**. If positioned on the downbeat of a measure, it is perceived as **cadential 6-4 chord**, first resolving to the dominant and then finally to the tonic. If positioned on a weak beat between a subdominant and its first inversion it is to be labeled as a **passing 6-4 chord** with no need to resolve any of its pitches.  

# Harmony and Gestalt
Intervals and chords are commonly derived from the harmonic series. The major triad has throughout history been explained as representative of the 4/5/6 relationship. The derivation of minor chord, in turn, has been more controversial. Some consider it the representation of the 10/12/15 relationship while others argue that it actually stems from the subharmonic series, the inversion of the harmonic series - with the same relationship of the ordinal numbers 4/5/6 as the major chord. While chords taken from the subharmonic series may still be considered stable, they often lack a fundamental quality related to the perception of a virtual fundamental and, therefore, sound less resonant.

Instead, chords ought to be regarded as hierarchical gestalts of gestalts where aspects such as virtual fundamental, voicing, sensory dissonance and temporal succession (context) come into play.

# Harmony in the 20th/21st Centuries

## Tension and Release

The progression of harmony from consonance through dissonance and back to consonance can be abstracted and seen as a buildup of tension and a release of that tension.  The serialist composers of the post-war period (Boulez, Stockhausen, etc.) gave up the ability to create tension and release through harmonic progression as they abandoned the sonorities and harmonic syntax of the past.  The generation to follow (Grisey, Murail, Saariaho) sought new ways of creating tension and release without returning to the rules of the past.  In her article Timbre and harmony: interpolations of timbral structures, Kaija Saariao proposes a "sound / noise axis" that could replace the tonal system of consonance / dissonance as a way of creating tension and release.  This is hear clearly in the opening seconds of her composition Nymphea for string quartet and electronics—here, the performers alternate between normal playing and noisy extended techniques such as playing on the bridge (listening example 3).  

 
<html>
  <head>
    <title>The Auditory System</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit9_saariaho-nymphea-beg.mp3">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
  </body>
</html>

Listening example 3. The opening minute of Kaija Saariaho's Nymphea for string quartet and electronics.

[PAGE FROM SCORE HERE]

In works such as Gérard Grisey's Partiels and Tristan Murail's Gondwana, the composers create a relationship between harmonicity and inharmonicity.  In this case, the concept of harmonicity refers to similarity to the harmonic series.  In Partiels, the opening sonority - a harmonic series derived from the acoustical analysis of a bass trombone - is gradually transformed into an increasingly inharmonic sonority by gradually placing the highest pitches into lower octaves.  In figure xx, the top graph is a sonogram of the opening 2'30" of Partiels and the bottom is a plot of the roughness (see the unit on consonance and dissonance) of the sonority over time created using a modified version of Richard Parncutt's algorithm.  


{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_partials1-roughness.png" description="The top plot is a sonogram of the first 3'40&quot; of Grisey's Partiels and the bottom plot is roughness against time." %}

<html>
  <head>
    <title>The Auditory System</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <audio controls src="/MUTOR/assets/audios/unit9_Partiels_first-section.mp3">
      Your browser does not support the audio element.
    </audio>
  </body>
</html> 
Listening example 4. The first 3'40" of Grisey's Partiels.

Although Grisey uses a very different system of harmony in Partiels, one can still see a constant transition between consonance and dissonance or tension and release. About this issue, the composer writes in his own words:

> Two traits characterize the development of sounds:  periodicity and the overtone spectrum. These elements, which are very easy to identify, give the piece continuity and a dynamic that corresponds rather closely to the cyclical form of human respiration: inhalation, exhalation and rest or tension / collapse — relaxation — collection of energy.

In the following demo, the roughness of a sound file can be calculated in realtime.  Download the first section of Partiels here (Partiels_first-section.aiff) to watch and listen to it in realtime.
{% include note author="vg" text="This needs to be redone" %}
{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_roughness-max-screenshot.png" description="Roughness" %}

[A BETTER PATCH IS COMING SOON]

## Harmony, Timbre and Transformation

The opening section of Partiels raises an interesting question:  is there a difference between a chord and a timbre?  In this case, it would seem that Grisey constructed a chord out of the elements of a timbre.  But, if a timbre is made up of a series of pitches, how is it different from a chord?  In most western classical music prior to the 20th century, harmony and timbre were considered two separate elements—the orchestration of a sonority could be done in many different ways and was often considered a subjective, surface-level detail.  However, in the 20th century, composers such as Olivier Messiaen began to think of timbre and harmony as inseparable, and it is likely that Grisey would refer to the opening sonority of Partiels as a timbre rather than a chord.  

A novel feature of Partiels is the idea of gradual timbral / harmonic evolution.  In the past, harmonic change and movement to new key areas was largely a discrete event, however, here, by only changing a few notes at a time by placing them in different octaves, Grisey creates a smooth transformation from one sonority to another.  David Wessel has developed a Max (http://www.cycling74.com) object that facilitates gradual timbral transformation.  Here, a timbre is created using a large bank of sinusoidal oscillators and a gradual transformation to a new timbre is done by changing the frequency of one oscillator at a time.  Download the following patch to experiment with different timbral transformations.


[NOTE--THIS IS A SCREENSHOT OF THE HELP PATCH.  A REAL DEMO IS COMING ASAP]

{% include img-figure url="/MUTOR/assets/images/unit9_migrator-ss.png" description="Roughness" %} 

# References

G. Grisey. Tempus ex machina: a composer’s reflections on musical time. Contemporary Music Review, 2(1):239–276, 1987.

R. Parncutt. Harmony: A Psychoacoustical Approach. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.

K. Saariaho. Timbre and harmony: Interpolations of timbral structures. Contemporary Music Review, 2(1):93–134, 1987.

D. Wessel.  Timbre space as a musical control structure.  xenakis.ircam.fr/articles/textes/Wessel78a/, 1978.

# Links and Downloads

The max patches for the unit can be downloaded here:  max.zip 

Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians:  http://www.grovemusic.com

Merriam-Webster Dictioinary:  http://www.m-w.com

Wikipedia has many pages dedicated to issues of tuning and temperament:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musical_temperament


{% include unit_postamble.md %}
