---
###
# unit information: 
# Expectation and Prediction
###
title: Expectation and Prediction
number: 0
short_description: short description of the unit
summary: brief summary of the unit
authors: 
 - Psyche Loui
topics: [topic 1, topic 2]
test_questions:
 - question 1
 - question 2

###
# page layout:
# don't change
###
layout: unit
citations: ""
mathjax: true
---

{% include unit_preamble.md %}

# Expectation and Prediction
 
1.- introduction
2.- expectancy?
3.- why do we care?
4.- theories of expectations
            expectation arousal
            expectation for melody
            expectation for rhythm
5.- methods 
            production paradigm
            betting paradigm
            comparative ethnomusicology 
            reaction time paradigm 
            head turn paradigm 
            statistical learning
            electro physiological studies
# Perception and action
action perception: a forward model. 
Feedforward and feedback loops. 
      - role of cerebellum as error correction 
     - guenther DIVA model
# Amusia (Tone-deafness) 
 - definitions
 - vs. poor pitch singing
 - psychometric methods 
 - psychophysical methods
 - MBEA and defining criteria
 - learning and memory
 - perception and production
 - neuroimaging findings: VBM, cortical thickness, fMRI, DTI 
# Emotion 
What makes music emotional?
Emotion and Meaning in Music by Leonard Meyer relates emotion to expectation
Theories of emotion: valence and arousal, the circumplex model, emotions as prediction and reactive appraisal. ITPRA model. Huron’s and Kahneman’s system1 and system 2
Emotion and bodily responses: causality? 
Measuring psychophysiological responses to emotion: HR, GSR, pupillometry, 
Emotion and reward system
Music structure and emotional response: Some empirical findings
     Appoggiatura —> Tears
     Chord progressions —> Chills 
Anatomically distinct dopamine release during anticipation and experience of peak emotion to music
     Dopamine and reward system 


{% include unit_postamble.md %}
